In terms of data and analysis of public services for autism, here's the current path I'm following, FWIW. 

1. Learn as much as possible about autistic Oregonians receiving DD social services via ODHS/ODDS, and their experiences with these services. Key data:
- Application, eligibility assessment & enrollment numbers
- Needs assessments (ADL, IADL, communication, behavior, etc.)
- Service program consumption (residential, employment, enrichment, etc.) 
- Safety levels within service programs (serious incident, abuse data)
- Satisfaction metrics within service programs (complaint and exception data)
- Quality control robustness (provider audits and oversight data)
- Service provider size and growth (licensing and client capacity data)
- Service provider quality of care (qualification and training requirements, staff turnover, etc.)

2. Study the same population's experiences with Medicaid via OHA since over 95% of all of those enrolled in DD Medicaid waiver services in ODHS/ODDS are also enrolled in OHP. Key data:
- Multimorbidity diagnoses statistics
- Service program consumption (OT, PT, SLP, ABA, mental health, etc.) 
- Satisfaction metrics (exception and appeals data)
- Service provider size and growth (licensing and client capacity data)
- Service provider quality of care (qualification and training requirements, turnover, prevalence of private insurance as primary insurer as an indicator of insufficient OHP coverage, prevalence of medical ROIs as an indicator of coordinated care efforts across medical and non-medical service providers, etc.)

3.  Study the extent to which other public services do or do not make intentional accommodations for autistic Oregonians.  Key data:
- Prevalence estimates of autism within the houseless population (OHCS)
- Prevalence estimates of autism within the unemployed population (ODHS/VRS and OED) 
- Prevalence estimates of autism within the incarcerated population (DOC) 
- [I have not fully thought out the target data sets for this step, but I imagine measures of targeted training and accommodations relevant to each service category (housing, employment, corrections) would be the way to go . Perhaps Ariel in his work has a better handle on what information would be useful]

I'm have my mind more fully into this subject next week once I get through some tricky decisions on 2025 health care enrollment for my fam this week. 


-------


  On 11/7/2024 6:38 AM, JOHN SAITO wrote:
> In terms of data and analysis of public services for autism, here's the current path I'm following, FWIW. 
>
> 1. Learn as much as possible about autistic Oregonians receiving DD social services via ODHS/ODDS, and their experiences with these services. Key data:
> - Application, eligibility assessment & enrollment numbers
> - Needs assessments (ADL, IADL, communication, behavior, etc.)
> - Service program consumption (residential, employment, enrichment, etc.) 
> - Safety levels within service programs (serious incident, abuse data)
> - Satisfaction metrics within service programs (complaint and exception data)
> - Quality control robustness (provider audits and oversight data)
> - Service provider size and growth (licensing and client capacity data)
> - Service provider quality of care (qualification and training requirements, staff turnover, etc.)
>
> 2. Study the same population's experiences with Medicaid via OHA since over 95% of all of those enrolled in DD Medicaid waiver services in ODHS/ODDS are also enrolled in OHP. Key data:
> - Multimorbidity diagnoses statistics
> - Service program consumption (OT, PT, SLP, ABA, mental health, etc.) 
> - Satisfaction metrics (exception and appeals data)
> - Service provider size and growth (licensing and client capacity data)
> - Service provider quality of care (qualification and training requirements, turnover, prevalence of private insurance as primary insurer as an indicator of insufficient OHP coverage, prevalence of medical ROIs as an indicator of coordinated care efforts across medical and non-medical service providers, etc.)
>
> 3.  Study the extent to which other public services do or do not make intentional accommodations for autistic Oregonians.  Key data:
> - Prevalence estimates of autism within the houseless population (OHCS)
> - Prevalence estimates of autism within the unemployed population (ODHS/VRS and OED) 
> - Prevalence estimates of autism within the incarcerated population (DOC) 
> - [I have not fully thought out the target data sets for this step, but I imagine measures of targeted training and accommodations relevant to each service category (housing, employment, corrections) would be the way to go . Perhaps Ariel in his work has a better handle on what information would be useful]
>
> I'm have my mind more fully into this subject next week once I get through some tricky decisions on 2025 health care enrollment for my fam this week. 
>
>
>  
>
>
>
> John Saito
> 503-888-7073
>
>> On 11/01/2024 12:40 PM PDT jbernheim orcommissionasd.org <jbernheim@orcommissionasd.org> wrote:
>>  
>>  
>> Attached is an email I sent to health care professionals who are members of the Commission and will be working with me on the draft bill to authorize the continued existence of the Commission.  It outlines our basic case for the Commission.  I did not include in that case the fact that we have only skeletal data on the autism population, but we might want to add that in.  If we get authorized to come up with a strategic plan on autism, it will certainly be featured in our report to the legislature.
>>  
>> The question that was addressed to me concerned primarily academic/clinical research.  I took the occasion to think through our main points and all the data we have or may need for that purpose.  In doing so, I listed data that is statistical and/or anecdotal, which is where you two come in.  Some of that data might be available to you within a few months (the time horizon we'd need it for to make our current case to the legislature), but most of it would need to be developed over time.
>>  
>> For example, all of the following data would be useful:  how many developmental pediatricians we have now vs.10 years ago (I can direct you to the folks who would know), the effective reduction in force from flat funding of Regional Inclusive Services since 2007 (the group working on the policy option package to revise the funding formula for regional inclusive services would have this info), reductions in special ed budgets (like the ones at Portland Public Schools, where they fired most of their BCBAs to pay for wage concessions to gen ed teachers), reductions in the number of special educators and licensed health professionals working in schools since 2014 (or another date), the average amount of time spent training special educators on autism in sped degree programs in Oregon, wait lists for diagnoses at the major diagnostic centers, data on the number of patients referred or self-referred to the major diagnostic centers without prior screening, data on referrals for autism evaluations in education made by health care providers without prior screening, useless or questionable diagnostic reports by health care professionals being received by educators (surveying members of the state autism Professional Leadership Team and/or directors of autism programs at regional inclusive services programs would help, and Therese Blanco, a member of our Screening, Identification, and Assessment Subcommittee recently completed a PhD dissertation on the quality of health care reports).
>>  
>> I may be overlooking something and you guys may have your own ideas about data to buttress our basic case for the Commission.  But anything you could glean along these lines by, say, early January, would be enormously helpful. 
>>  
>>  
>> From: jbernheim orcommissionasd.org <jbernheim@orcommissionasd.org>
>> Sent: Friday, November 1, 2024 12:00 PM
>> To: Darryn Sikora <darryn.m.sikora.phd@icloud.com>; Debra Koutnik <debra.koutnik@ashlandnet.net>; Mara McLoughlin <mara@irlsocialskills.com>
>> Subject: Fw: Data for legislative proposal
>>  
>> Thanks, Darryn.   
>>  
>> You asked what areas of research I think we need.  I think of it in the following way.  We have been told that nobody in the legislature is going to look at research.  However, there are two stages at which research is relevant.  First, we are going to be making the basic case to multiple legislators and we want to know that we are supported by a combination of professional experience and statistical and clinical/academic research concerning our basic claims.  If we get to hearings on the bill, we will doubtless submit more detailed testimony that may include references to research and other data.  But legislators will primarily be impressed by (1) consensus statements from highly credentialed and experienced (HCE) professionals, and (2) personal stories.  So, research at this point is only necessary insofar as HCE professionals believe they need it to be able to make our case in a professionally responsible way.  One of our challenges will be to identify a few essential propositions and get as many HCE Oregon professionals to sign on as possible.  I'm thinking of education and health care professionals on the Commission and its subcommittees, as well as folks like Brad Hendershott, Aggie Wolfe, Bob Nickel, Katie Zuckerman, Randy Phelps, Sondra Marshall, & Robin McCoy.  Who else do we know that we could include in this group?
>>  
>> I'm thinking that our main bullet points are as follows: 
>>  
>> (1) the autism population is probably the single most numerous that requires services from all three of the major service systems (health care,  education and developmental disabilities) over the lifespan, with a prevalence rate that has quadrupled since 2004 and continues to rise, even while human and financial resources to serve it have shrunk; 
>>  
>> (2) over the past 15 years the voices of autistic self-advocates have combined with a more robust research base in autism and related fields, so that we now have a different consensus about how to respond to both the commonalities and the heterogeneity within the population;
>>  
>> (3) a systemic, coordinated population-based approach to early detection, adequate assessment, interventions focused on social emotional development across the lifespan, family supports (service navigation and PMRIs), workforce education, and housing is the only way to significantly reduce the impact of autism on autistic people, their families/caregivers, and state budgets;
>>  
>> (4) the autism population will benefit from many of the system-wide efforts currently underway in each of the 3 main service systems, but those efforts are not sufficient due to (a) the unique characteristics of autism and high rates of co-occurring conditions, both of which require care co-ordination and integration within and across systems, and (b) the need and ability to intervene at the earliest stage of development to minimize negative cascading effects;
>>  
>> (5) only a body that combines the deep personal experience of autistic individuals and their families/caregivers with the professional and governmental experience of those working in public and private organizations serving them can develop an effective roadmap to the systemic approach they need; and 
>>  
>> (6)  solutions developed for the autistic population will benefit other populations (those with high rates of co-occurring conditions, who need care coordination within and across systems, and those whose social emotional development is disrupted by environmental causes after birth, who can benefit from PMRIs).
>>  
>> With respect to Point 1, we have both anecdotal and statistical evidence, but what we lack will need to come from government data.  Other data hounds are helping us with this.
>>  
>> With respect to Points 2 and 3, based on my own travels through the academic/clinical research, the major supports for the need to address the commonalities in the population systemically are: Katie Zuckerman's Oregon research on screening & referral for ASD,  Project AASPIRE, the Project AIM meta-analysis articles, the graph from Introduction to Social Neuroscience showing the hockey puck rise in social neuroscience research, the research on the mental and physical effects of social isolation, elevated rates of suicidality and mood disorders in the autism population, PMRI outcomes studies, impacts of autism (and PMRIs) on families, the backlash against ABA, the NICE and Australian government recommendations regarding interventions for the core symptoms of ASD, anecdotal evidence of refusals to accommodate autistic patients with dire consequences, anecdotal evidence of workforce ignorance about autism and the insufficiency of training efforts that do exist (e.g., the optional SEIU training for direct and personal service workers), the data John Saito has gathered from ODDS regarding adult services and housing, the Kuni Foundation report on the housing needs of the disabled, and the 2023 bill mandating that the needs of disabled people with physical disabilities (but not other disabilities) be required for county housing needs planning.  Are there other major pieces of academic & clinical research I'm missing?  Do we think our HCE colleagues need to see research on this?
>>  
>> The new evidence for the heterogeneity in the population (and the consequent need to assess individuals completely and tailor interventions to individual differences) comes primarily from the research showing the tremendous genetic variance within the autistic population, the number of genes highly associated with ASD that have already been discovered, and the projected numbers people expect to discover.  Obviously, this is just an easily-grasped-by-legislators explanation for what HCE professionals know from their clinical experience.  I have some research articles on this, but do HCE folks need to see research on this?
>>  
>> With respect to Point 4, the state is spending mammothly on substance abuse treatment and inpatient psychiatric beds, both of which are probably being designed without the needs of autistic people in mind.  I don't know the state of knowledge among HCE autism folks about co-occurring mental health conditions, but I suspect the research that exists is fairly recent and not as widely known.   I have a couple of articles showing elevated rates of co-occurring mental/behavioral health conditions in the autism population, and one article showing differences in the drivers of suicidality, but not much else.  Based on some presentations at INSAR a few years ago, we might want to say that symptoms of mental health conditions look different in the autism population and need to be treated through an autism lens that takes into account the totality of the individual's physical and psychological issues.  Any research to back this up would help, especially data on how few mental health professionals know about autism.  Does anyone know anything about the rates of co-occurring conditions within the general mental health population?  I'm guessing that they are pretty high, especially between substance abuse and other mental health conditions and between depression and anxiety, but possibly not as high/numerous on average as within the autism population.  Also, is there any research on the impact on mental health co-morbidity resulting specifically from the social interaction differences that are a core feature of autism?
>>  
>>  
>>  
>>  
>>  
>> From: Joyce Bernheim <joycebernheim@gmail.com>
>> Sent: Thursday, October 31, 2024 9:39 AM
>> To: jbernheim orcommissionasd.org <jbernheim@orcommissionasd.org>
>> Subject: Fwd: Data for legislative proposal
>>  
>>
>>
>> ---------- Forwarded message ---------
>> From: <
>> darryn.m.sikora.phd@icloud.com
>> >
>> Date: Tue, Oct 29, 2024 at 2:56 PM
>> Subject: Data for legislative proposal
>> To: Joyce Bernheim <
>> joycebernheim@gmail.com
>> >
>>
>>
>> Joyce,
>> After then meeting last Friday I continued to dig a bit about how to make a case for OCA. Attached is what I found thus far. I wanted to get it to you asap. If I can come up with more data, I’ll send it along.
>> Is there something specific that you think we need?
>> Darryn
>>
>>
>> -- 
>> Joyce
